The strange afterlife of the Hayes smartmodem

About those modems: the word is a portmanteau for "modulator/demodulator". Modems allowed digital signals to pass over copper phone wires - ridiculously slowly by today’s standards, but that’s how we did our primitive wide-area networking in pre-Internet times. It was not generally known back then that modems had first been invented in the late 1950s for use in military communications, notably the SAGE air-defense network; we just took them for granted.

Today modems that speak over copper or optical fiber are embedded invisibly in the Internet access point in your basement; other varieties perform over-the-air signal handling for smartphones and tablets. A variety every hacker used to know about (and most of us owned) was the "outboard" modem, a separate box wired to your computer and your telephone line.

Inboard modems (expansion cards for your computer) were also known (and became widespread on consumer-grade computers towards the end of the modem era), but hackers avoided them because being located inside the case made them vulnerable to RF noise, and the blinkenlights on an outboard were useful for diagnosing problems. Also, most hackers learned to interpret (at least to some extent) modem song - the beeping and whooshing noises the outboards made while attempting to establish a connection. The happy song of a successful connect was identifiably different from various sad songs of synchronization failure.

One relic of modem days is the name of the Unix SIGHUP signal, indicating that the controlling terminal of the user’s process has disconnected. HUP stands for "HangUP" and this originally indicated a serial line drop (specifically, loss of Data Carrier Detect) as produced by a modem hangup.

These old-fashioned modems were, by today’s standards, unbelievably slow. Modem speeds increased from 110 bits per second back at the beginning of interactive computing to 56 kilobits per second just before the technology was effectively wiped out by wide-area Internet around the end of the 1990s, which brought in speeds of a megabit per second and more (20 times faster). For the longest stable period of modem technology after 1970, about 1984 to 1991, typical speed was 9600bps. This has left some traces; it’s why surviving serial-protocol equipment tends to default to a speed of 9600bps.

There was a line of modems called "Hayes Smartmodems" that could be told to dial a number, or set parameters such as line speed, with command codes sent to the modem over its serial link from the machine. Every hacker used to know the "AT" prefix used for commands and that, for example, ATDT followed by a phone number would dial the number. Other modem manufacturers copied the Hayes command set and variants of it became near universal after 1981.

What was not commonly known then is that the "AT" prefix had a helpful special property. That bit sequence (1+0 1000 0010 1+0 0010 1010 1+, where the plus suffix indicates one or more repetitions of the preceding bit) has a shape that makes it as easy as possible for a receiver to recognize it even if the receiver doesn’t know the transmit-line speed; this, in turn, makes it possible to automatically synchronize to that speed [2].

That property is still useful, and thus in 2017 the AT convention has survived in some interesting places. AT commands have been found to perform control functions on 3G and 4G cellular modems used in smartphones. On one widely deployed variety, "AT+QLINUXCMD=" is a prefix that passes commands to an instance of Linux running in firmware on the chip itself (separately from whatever OS might be running visibly on the phone).
